Query Scheduler DESIGN.md for RequestQueue updates (#9414)
grafana/mimir: pkg/scheduler/DESIGN.md

# Query Request Queue Design: Queue Splitting and Prioritization

The `RequestQueue` subservice embedded into the scheduler process is responsible for
all decisions regarding enqueuing and dequeuing of query requests.
While the `RequestQueue`'s responsibilities are relatively broad, including management of
querier-worker connection lifecycles and graceful startup/shutdown,
the queuing logic is isolated into a "tree queue" structure and its associated queue algorithms.

## Tree Queue: What and Why

> The "tree queue" structure serves the purpose of a discrete priority queue.

Reviewer: I'm not married to the word "builds," but I think the phrase `serves the purpose of` can be replaced with just one word.
```suggestion
The "tree queue" structure builds a discrete priority queue.
```

> The "tree queue" structure serves the purpose of a discrete priority queue.
> The requests are split into many queues, each of which is located at a leaf node in the tree structure.

Reviewer: I'm not married to the word "builds," but I do think `serves the purpose of` can be condensed into one word for conciseness. 
```suggestion
The "tree queue" structure builds a discrete priority queue.
Requests are split into many queues, each of which is located at a leaf node in the tree structure.
```

> The tree structure enables some of the specific requirements of our queue selection algorithms:
> 
> - we must select a queue to dequeue from based on two independent algorithms, each with their own state
> - there is a hierarchy of importance between the two algorithms - one is primary, the other secondary
> - one of the algorithms (tenant-querier shuffle shard) can reject all queue options presented to it,
>   requiring us to return back up to the previous level of queue selection to continue searching.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A tree structure supports some requirements of our queue selection algorithms:

- A queue to dequeue from based is selected based on two independent decision algorithms, each with its own state
- The decision algorithms are hierarchical, or ordered - with two identical sets of request queues, the chosen queue may change depending on the order of algorithm execution
- one algorithm (tenant-querier shuffle shard) may not return any valid queues, requiring traversal back up the tree to continue searching.
```

        fast        :active, c1-6, 05, 1s
        fast        :active, c1-7, 06, 1s
        fast        :active, c1-8, 07, 1s
        fast        :active, c1-9, 08, 1s
        fast        :active, c1-10, 09, 1s
        fast        :active, c1-11, 10, 1s
        fast        :active, c1-12, 11, 1s
        fast        :active, c1-13, 12, 1s
        fast        :active, c1-14, 13, 1s
        fast        :active, c1-15, 14, 1s
        fast        :active, c1-16, 15, 1s

    section consumer-2
        fast        :active, c2-1, 00, 1s
        fast        :active, c2-2, 01, 1s
        fast        :active, c2-3, 02, 1s
        fast        :active, c2-4, 03, 1s
        fast        :active, c2-5, 04, 1s
        fast        :active, c2-6, 05, 1s
        fast        :active, c2-7, 06, 1s
        fast        :active, c2-8, 07, 1s
        fast        :active, c2-9, 08, 1s
        fast        :active, c2-10, 09, 1s
        fast        :active, c2-11, 10, 1s
        fast        :active, c2-12, 11, 1s
        fast        :active, c2-13, 12, 1s
        fast        :active, c2-14, 13, 1s
        fast        :active, c2-15, 14, 1s
        fast        :active, c2-16, 15, 1s

>     section consumer-3

Reviewer: In the worst case, I think 3/4 consumers would see slow queries? Still an improvement, though (25% time spent on fast vs. 12.5%).

Author: > Again we simplify the system to two query components and four querier connections.

this example is simplified to only two "lanes", two query components, so the split is 50/50, there's just 4 consumers because having 4 offered a better illustration in the previous version of this graph above.

in reality if there are all query components active then yes it's 25% but that is explained elsewhere

## Tree Queue: What and Why

The "tree queue" structure serves as a discrete priority queue.
Requests are split into many queues, each of which is located at a leaf node in the tree structure.

The tree structure enables some of the specific requirements of our queue selection algorithms:

> 1. The system must select a queue to dequeue from based on two independent algorithms, each with their own state:

Author: I stopped trying to be so generic about what algorithms we are talking about in the requirements here, and just listed the actual differences by algorithm

   1. A query component selection for isolation of query component latency effects
   1. A global tenant rotation for tenant fairness, with configurable shuffle-sharding
1. There is a decision hierarchy between the two queue selection algorithms
   1. For the same inputs, queue selection first by query component, then by tenant
      will often result in a different outcome than queue selection first by tenant, then by query component
   1. In order to effectively isolate query component latency effects,
      the query component selection algorithm must take precedence over tenant rotation
1. The tenant rotation algorithm can reject all queue options presented to it when shuffle-sharding is enabled;
   1. In order to minimize idle querier capacity, the system must be able to
      return up to the query component selection level to continue the search

These requirements lend themselves to a search tree or decision tree structure;
the levels of the tree express a clear hierarchy of decisonmaking between the two algorithms,
and the depth-first traversal provides a familiar pattern for searching for a leaf node to dequeue from.

### Diagram: Dequeue Decision Tree (Simplified)

> > [!NOTE]

Author: added note

A request from `tenant-1` which is expected to only utilize ingesters
will be enqueued at the leaf node reached by the path `root -> ingester -> tenant-1`.

> This results in `O(m * n)` queues in the tree structure:

Author: not requested by your PR, but wanted to clarify this

1. tenant fairness via a simple round-robin between all tenants with non-empty query request queues
1. rudimentary tenant isolation via shuffle-shard assignment of noisy tenants to only a subset of queriers

While this inter-tenant Quality-of-Service approach has worked well,
other QoS issues have arisen from the varying characteristics of Mimir's two "query components"
utilized by the queriers to fetch TSDB data for executing queries: ingesters and store-gateways.

> ### New Requirement: Isolating Query Component Latency Effects

Author: updated this as Queue Splitting was not the requirement, fixing the observed problem was the requirement

Ingesters serve requests for recent data, and store-gateways serve requests for older data.
While queries can span the time periods served by both query components,
many requests are served by only one of the two components.

Ingesters and store-gateways tend to experience issues independently of each other,
but when one component was in a degraded state, _all_ queries would wait in the queue behind the slow queries,
causing high latency and timeouts for queries which could have been serviced by the non-degraded query component.

#### Goals

The primary goal of the new design solution is to keep queries which only require the non-degraded query component
moving through the queue and being processed, rather than waiting in the queue behind the slow queries.

#### Non-Goals

In real-world scenarios queries to the degraded query component are often slow enough to hit timeouts,
and the majority of those queries will be expected to fail until the component recovers.

#### Constraints

> The solution should maintain high utilization of queriers while there are still any requests in the queue.

Author: I took this from something you added later in the benchmarks section

> secondary measure of success is the continued utilization of queriers while there are still any requests in the queue.

I figured it was better to put it at the top here as a constraint, since we do not have stuff in this particular doc about querier utilization from the benchmarks and simulations

Querier capacity should not be permanently "reserved" for any query type;
as there is no guarantee of when that query type will be enqueued again,
permanent capacity reservation could result resource under-utilization and waste.

> ### Solution 1: Queue Splitting by Query Component and Query Component Selection by Round-Robin

Author: reframed from "Phases" to "Solutions" to de-emphasize the project timeline narrative

Tenant queues were split again by query component, resulting in up to four queues per tenant.

With queues now split and selected by two dimensions rather than one,
we introduced the "tree queue" structure, inspired by Loki's implementation.

This solution attempted to minimize the complexity of changes:

1. the tenant selection algorithm was kept higher in the tree
   and therefore took priority over the query component queue selection algorithm.
1. the query component selection algorithm was a simple round-robin.

These design decisions resulted in severe limitations in Solution 1's ability to isolate query component latency,
as determined through benchmarks, simulations, and observation in production environments.

> #### Limitation 1 (minor): Tenant Selection Priority over Query Component Selection

Author: Failures -> Limitations

We conservatively expect degradation of the store-gateway query component will cause high latency
for the queries in the `store-gateway`, `ingester-and-store-gateway`, and `unknown` queues,
but by partitioning the querier-worker connections evenly across the four queues,
25% of connections remain reserved to process queries from the `ingester` queue.
25% of connections remain "reserved" to process queries from the `ingester` queue.

The primary measure of success is the servicing of the queries to the non-degraded query component,

> In real-world scenarios the slow queries are often slow enough to hit timeouts,

Author: moved up to non-goals section
